# ai-case-study

***Artificial Intelligence Initiatives at PNC Bank***
## Overview
>PNC Bank
>April 10, 1845
## Origin
The company provides financial services such as estate planning in order to fund the lives of its stakeholders. It offers products and services that fulfill customers' financial needs and goals. DACA is the Deposit Account Control Agreement that serves as a legal contract for services between lenders and borrowers. It protects the lenders' interests and the borrowers' deposits.
PNC Bank is largely funded by loan, stock, and deposit services. For example, Q2 2024 revenue was about $5.4 billion. Average commercial and consumer loans had estimated value of $319.9 billion. Average investment securities had estimated value of $141.3 billion, primarily from U.S. Treasury securities. Average deposits had estimated value of $417.2 billion among corporate, commercial, and consumer groups.
## Landscape
PNC is a financial institution. Data analytics has been a consistently growing sector of opportunity for PNC to improve efficiency. The major hurdles have been how to document and classify the immense amount of data obtained. There is consistently a gap in data visualization that documentation cannot realistically capture. There are almost millions of data tables with full relationships too complex to understand. The data can consistently be incomplete and need pruning even with numerous validation rules. As much as solutions are projected to handle the majority of business cases, there will always be a need for new solutions as the market evolves.
PNC Bank ranks among the Top 10 largest banks in the United States according to total assets. Other larger financial institutions include JP Morgan Chase and Co, Bank of America, and CitiGroup.
## Business Activities
The process to review and monitor DACA agreements is highly manual. The process can take a substantial amount of time and run the risk of human error. Automation is projected to save $2.5M and 94K hours of labor based on estimates of 70K documents per year. The stages of collection, preservation, and analytics are subject to enhancement. Collection is manually downloading DACAs one-by-one. Preservation is no central storage of DACA contents. Analytics is manual review instead of automation.
The DACA digitization initiative serves 4.6K lenders supporting millions of borrowers. DACAs are accommodative products that service well-banked lending clients. They are not sold proactively and new clients are rarely onboarded. Clients are mostly in the Real Estate and Business Credit segments.
PNC Bank is continuously improving and investing in Artificial Intelligence initiatives to advance technological capabilities. Some projects employing Generative AI include virtual assistants in various knowledge search sectors. There are new virtual assistants being trained to answer procedural, product and service, and risk policy questions from PNC employees. This can lead to productivity gains. Additionally, Generative AI is being prototyped to develop software without human connection by generating code, testing scripts, and debugging prompts. This could potentially be seen as an unfair practice that leads to less employee focus.
PNC Bank is using Robotic Process Automation to complete manual repetitive tasks such as the DACA digitization initiative. Document AI is implementing machine learning programs to classify and extract data from documents. Conversational AI is implementing unsupervised learning for natural language processing in customer interactions. Data Science is implementing machine learning models for predictive insight. PNC is using Kore.ai, SearchAssist, GPT3.5 Turbo, and GPT-4 for much of its Generative AI knowledge search capabilities. Other tools were considered including Indico Insights, Azure Bot Service, and Microsoft Copilot Studio.
## Results
The Generative AI implementation has largely affected internal operations with little customer-facing use cases. The approach is to foster technical experimentation by identifying the potential business value and limiting risk. The risk-controlled experimentation of Generative AI has been tested across technology in order to enhance governance and insight. It is estimated that by 2026 80% of businesses will have Generative AI capabilities. PNC is keeping pace with this trend and has been realizing value with time.
Knowledge graphs will allow for PNC Bank to tackle many problems including Risk and Compliance, Operational Efficiency, Marketing, and Investments. I work in the Fraud Detection sector, so the Loss Avoidance Decision Model for deposits effectively alerts check volume for automation or manual review to prevent return losses. Budgets are assigned to different sectors in which fraud losses are anticipated to occur. The budget has decreased as time passes due to the improved countermeasures implemented.
Fraud losses for other financial institutions are unknown, but larger-asset banks are known to have more counterfeit items given their ease of access. There was a recent social media trend of successful ATM check fraud cases at Chase Bank. Wells Fargo checks are also very easily replicated on the dark web.
## Recommendations
It is recommended to implement more solutions using the Amazon Web Services Sage Maker tool. AWS is the oldest cloud provider with widespread data centers and state-of-the-art artificial intelligence tools. The current Machine Learning Operations team can prepare, build, train, and deploy the models built in the Sage Maker studio. There is automatic model tuning for use on Random Forests and Neural Networks.
Amazon Sage Maker can detect bias in machine learning models and alert for prediction adjustments. Bias can be evaluated in the various stages of model generation including preparation, training, feature selection, inference, and reporting. This can be used with historic or near real-time datasets.
Amazon Bedrock is a Generative AI application that can manage difficult infrastructures. This is also a serverless tool that can be spontaneously adjusted based on end user prompt feedback. Bedrock utilizes embeddings for natural language processsing. Text can be represented as numerical vectors that capture relationships and nuances between words. The integrity of embeddings can be selected to identify meanings and can translate limited different languages.
Retrieval Augmented Generation provides the model with information that can improve the relevance of response. Compared to traditional keyword searches, vector searches support packages such as OpenSearch, Pinecone, and Redis to adjust for inexact matches. The natural language model can create an embedding query and then retrieve documents from the knowledge base. This can enable prompt engineering agents that can act autonomously and connect with external systems.
## Addendum
https://www.pnc.com/en/about-pnc/company-profile/legacy-project/corporate-history.html#:~:text=1865,of%20the%20newly%2Dformed%20bank
https://pnc.sharepoint.com.mcas.ms/sites/osp-co-ot-datacommunity/SitePages/2024-Data-Science-Summit-Recap.aspx
https://investor.pnc.com/news-events/financial-press-releases/detail/633/pnc-reports-second-quarter-2024-net-income-of-1-5-billion
https://www.ffiec.gov/npw/Institution/TopHoldings
